Lecturer: When a PC, for example, is connecting
to a web server on the internet,
traffic will be sent from a source IP address
to a destination IP address.
So, the source IP address in this transmission
will be from the host 10111
to the server 10121.
Traffic will be routed
from the PC to the server.
And when the traffic arrives at the server,
the server needs a way to differentiate
which application to send this traffic to.
Well-known port numbers are used
for various common day applications like HTTP.
So, this server will be running
a web server application like IIS or Apache
which serves up the webpages for the web browser.
Using Apache as an example,
the Apache server will be listening to traffic
on Port 80, which is the well-known
port number for HTTP.
Your browser will automatically
open up a connection to the service
IP address on that port number,
if the defaults are used.
When that traffic arrives
at the transport layer,
TCP will send that traffic
to port 80, the port number,
the Apache server is listening on,
and the Apache server, at the application layer,
will process the data received.
The PC will use a random source
port number in a specific range.
That range is dependent on the operating system
and whether the IANA standards are followed.
But essentially, a random port number
is used as the source
and a well-known port number is used
as the destination in this conversation.
When the reply from the server
is sent back to the PC,
note that the source address
will be the server's IP address
and the port number will be port 80.
The destination IP address
will be the PC's IP address
and the port number the PC selected
as the source port number.
So note, return traffic has the IP addresses reversed
and the port numbers are reversed.
The PC's web browser,
let's say for instance internet Explorer,
will be listening on this port 60000.
And when the traffic arrives
at the PC's transport layer,
in this case, TCP,
TCP will push that traffic to Port 60000,
the port number that Internet Explorer
is expecting to receive the traffic on,
thus port numbers bind layer 4 to layer 7,
allowing applications to communicate.
Now, there are some well-known port numbers
that you need to remember.
Well-known port numbers
are in the range less than or equal to 1023.
So, for example, HTTP uses port 80
and TCP, as its transport layer protocol.
FTP control,
which is used for FTP server
and client negotiation,
uses Port 21, using TCP.
FTP Data, which is used for the actual transmission
of data in FTP,
uses Port 20 and TCP.
Telnet, used for management, uses Port 23
and uses TCP.
DNS is an interesting case
because it uses both TCP and UDP
and uses Port 53.
DNS, primarily, uses UDP on port 53 to serve requests.
In other words, when a host needs a resolution,
for say, cisco.com,
that will use UDP Port 53.
TCP is used when the response data
exceeds 512 bytes
or for tasks such as zone transfers.
Zone transfers are used
for replication of databases
containing DNS data
across a set of DNS servers.
TFTP uses UDP Port 69.
And SNMP uses UDP Port 161.
Once again, to see a list of port numbers,
go to Google and type iana port numbers.
And as you can see here,
the internet assigned numbers authority for IANA.
A port number list is available for viewing.
As you can see here,
the well-known port numbers on the range,
zero to 1023.
However, because of the number of applications
that are in use,
there's a second range known
as the registered ports
in the range 1024 through to 49151,
which are generally used
for proprietary applications.
Dynamic or private port numbers
on the range 49152 through to 65535.
As you can see,
the full port range is from zero to 65535.
To search for a well-known application,
I'm just going to use
the key sequence control + F
and then type in, for example, Telnet.
And as you can see here,
Telnet uses port 23.
Now, both TCP and UDP could be used for Telnet
but in most implementations, TCP is used.
I could search for another protocol,
like, let's say TFTP.
And as you can see here,
TFTP uses port 69.
Once again, TCP or UDP could be used,
but in real world applications, UDP is used.
I could search, for example, for HTTP
and as you can see here,
notice port 80.
There are many applications here,
some of which, you may never have used or seen.
Here's another example,
bootp and its derivative,
DHEP, used port 67 and 68.
I could scroll down the list
and show you many, many port numbers.
Here's an example of VMware,
and here's an example
of some of the port numbers used by Bloomberg.
Now, according to the IANA,
there are three ranges of port numbers.
Well-known port numbers are less than or equal to 1023,
registered port numbers on this range
1024 to 49151,
and dynamically assigned port numbers
which should be used by hosts
when initiating sessions to,
for instance, well-known port numbers
on the range 49152 to 65535.
However, vendor implementations do not necessarily
follow that recommendation.
Ephemeral port numbers are short-lived ports
used for the client's side of a connection.
So, when your PC initiates a session
to a web server,
an ephemeral port will be used.
They are temporary
and only last for the duration of the session.
As I've shown you,
the IANA suggests the range
49152 to 65535.
However, BSD uses this range 1024 through 4999.
Linux or Linux uses ports 32768 to 61000.
Windows through to server 2003,
use the range 1025 to 5000.
Windows Vista, and 7,
use the actual IANA range
and free BSD uses the IANA range since version 4.6.
So, just be aware,
the source port numbers used by hosts
will vary based on the vendor implementation
and which ephemeral port numbers
that vendor has decided to use.
So, in this example,
this host, which may be running Windows Vista,
is using a source port of 60000
when connecting to this Apache server
on well-known Port 80.